Welcome everybody to chapter 2.
We are going to start today with
a warm up exercise just for you.
So from practical.css.education,
the course website,
you want to go to chapter 2.
The link is there on the homepage.
Scroll down,
you'll find it on the left side.
And then if you scroll down here
under part 1, establishing colors,
click on the link to the beginning
code pen, which is right here.
That will open up in a new tab for you.
And this is where we're starting from.
You can fork this code
pen to your own account.
And then I'll give you some
time to work on this exercise.
So what I would like for
you to do is the following.
I have set some things up for you here
inside of this webpage as you see.
So to start with here we have a series
of what will eventually be colored
boxes as you can see here they
are called by their various color names.
And they're inside of a div
with a class of colors.
Then we have some type down here,
so headings 1 through 6.
We have a paragraph, a link.
We have an unordered and
an ordered list along with some strongly
emphasized and emphasized text.
I have a block quote.
And we have a figure down here,
and of course the figure has got,
I'll show you what that looks like.
Here's the men of Magenta Lime.
There they are.
And they have a figure caption
that is associated with them.
All right, so basically there is
not a class to be seen except for
these initial color boxes.
And so the goal here is to start with
a very, very basic page and we're gonna
set up a bunch of variables that we
are going to use for all of our websites.
And setting up a basic page like
this is an advantage because then we
can set up that basic
styling right from the start.
We're starting at the very base of CSS.
On top of this, we can build all
of our exceptions via classes or
crazy selectors and
all kinds of other things.
But right now,
we wanna get our base styling that
we're gonna use most of the time.
We wanna set that all up and
get it in place.
So what I'd like for
you guys to do first is the following.
And I'll give this to
you as a comment here.
So first of all, one,
I want you to establish these
colors as CSS global variables.
Think about that for a minute.
Do you know what a variable is in CSS?
Do you know how to establish it?
Do you know how to make it quote global,
think about that for a moment and
then I'll take questions.
And then second, I would like you to
display these colors in a series,
Of small boxes, and I'm gonna recommend
that you make them 3 rem by 3 rem.
If you don't know what a rem is,
ask me and I'll explain rem to you.
One color per box.
And then, Put all of
those color boxes in a row.
With a 1 rem gap between.
And I think those instructions are,
when you're done you should have basically
a series of boxes that'll look like that.
The rest of these won't be done yet but
I want you to set up your color boxes
such that they look like that, okay?
>> How do you declare
a global CSS property?
>> I love it,
how do you declare a global CSS property?
Wonderful question, let's start with that.
So here inside of your CSS,
I'm gonna address that in just a second.
Notice that we have a little
bit of CSS here by default.
Anybody know what this CSS is here?
What is the CSS that you see here?
>> It's creating a barter box so that,
my understanding is that padding and
margin don't cause the size
of the box to change.
>> Correct, absolutely right.
Yes, though the border box,
we've talked about this many
times before in my courses.
This is such that when we start to
add padding and margin to our boxes,
they don't get bigger on the page and
then break our layouts.
So anytime you're working inside of CSS,
this little incantation should start at
the beginning of your document, okay?
By default, this does not happen.
By default, as you add padding and margin,
boxes get bigger because width property
is defined by the width of your content.
So this is really critical.
You can just copy and
paste that anytime you want.
It's called border box.
If you just google for border box,
you'll find somebody who'll
give you this little snip.
All right, so once that is,
that little bit of code is for,
then how do we declare these
quote global variables?
We're going to start with
the root pseudo class.
So root, :root.
It's a pseudo class.
Why root instead of HTML?
Anybody have an idea why
root instead of HTML?
Okay, so HTML is an element, right?
Is there a before or an after on HTML?
Are there nodes that come before and
after HTML?
Just like their nodes
on every HTML element.
There's a before and an after,
trust me on this, that is, in fact, true.
So when we go to route,
we're going to select everything.
What is another reason?
>> You're allowed to pull them into other
selectors as opposed to them being nested
inside of a particular selector.
>> Exactly, you can pull these from root
into any part of your web page, right?
That is sort of the definition of root.
What is the specificity of root as
opposed to an HTML element selector?
>> Well, pseudo classes as a whole
are normally less specific than a class,
but more specific than a tag
>> Close,
they're exactly the same
specificity as a class, okay.
Pseudo classes and classes have
the same level of specificity.
They take priority over an HTML
element like HTML or body or
paragraph or
any of the rest of them, right?
And since so many of us use so
many classes in our designs,
it may be good to start with something
that is of a similar specificity.
Yes, okay, so we're gonna use root.
Now we're gonna use this
to declare some variables.
How do we declare a variable in CSS,
anybody?
>> Dash dash.
>> Yeah, and the name right.
So I am super creative and
break all rules by calling my colors but
the actual color that we're representing.
We don't have to worry
about ever changing them.
In real life, usually you wanna
call these colors by whatever,
primary colors, secondary color,
that kinda thing.
So you don't wind up with a color called
lime, that is purple [LAUGH] right?
But we're gonna start here with lime and
the color from your
webpage will be A4FFA2.
Okay, so that's how we declare it.
Notice nothing has changed on my page.
How do I actually apply this
variable to my webpage?
>> You put it somewhere,
you assign it to an element or something.
>> Exactly,
we have to assign it somewhere.
This is just like in JavaScript
where you declare a variable.
Good times, that's great, but
it just hangs out there and is,
it doesn't actually do anything.
Same idea here, so we need to apply it.
So what we'll do is we can
create a class called lime
because we're super creative that way.
And we can say background color of var,
this is how we call it var lime.
Okay, Now notice
that we do have a div with
a class of lime here, right?
So the HTML exists, it has a class on it.
And we've created a style here
that corresponds with that div.
But I don't see anything on this webpage,
why is that?
>> The div is empty, there's no content
>> The div has no content, it is empty.
So it will just not show [LAUGH].
If we started typing in it, hello,
something will show up
here on our web page.
There it is, right?
But because there is nothing in that div,
it will not show here on the web page.
How do we get around this
problem if we want no content?
>> Set a width and a height.
>> Exactly, and
we're gonna set a width and a height.
And so a great way to do this.
Those of you who are fan of wacky
selectors, here's a nice way to do it.
We're gonna say .colors > *.
What does that mean?
Colors > *.
Remember that we write our
selectors from left to right but
we read them from right to left.
Read them from right to left.
So what does star mean?
>> Anything?
>> Anything at all, right?
>> What does that greater than sign mean?
>> Direct descendants.
Okay, so that might be new to some of you,
direct descendants.
So in other words, lime, magenta,
magenta 50, white, tan, teal, cyan, black.
All of those are direct descendants
of that outside div called colors.
Which we call here so we're saying all of
those descendants, we wanna do something.
What could we do with 3 rem?
Height 3 rem?
Yeah, we did that.
We made a box.
Where did that giant space just come from?
>> Are they arranged vertically right now,
all the divs?
>> Yeah,
all those divs are arranged vertically.
Andrew, you're burning it up here.
Awesome, yeah, those are all those divs.
They're right on top of each other, yep.
Okay, so
now that you know those sorts of basics,
I'm gonna turn you loose
on the rest of these.
Set up some more variables,
okay, so set up those variables,
just like I said here, and
then display those on the page.
Those will be a series of boxes, and
then make them go in a row, all right?
All right, so how did that go?
Did everybody get something similar
to what you see on my screen here?
Maybe you have sort of a missing hole.
That's because you have a white
box on a white background.
I put a little border on mine just so you
can see that it's actually there, okay?
So for anybody who got stuck, let's
just take a quick look at the code here.
In the CSS, we have our root declarations
as are all the colors that came from
the website that I told you about.
And then I have all of my individual
declarations for all of those classes.
Like I said, I put a border
around the white box just so
that we can see that there
is in fact something there.
And then we made this
display using Flexbox.
So we simply took colors,
why did I take colors?
Why did I take colors here to display for
Flexbox?
Anybody know?
>> Put flux on the parent?
>> Right, so all about parents and
children all about containers and items.
I'll only say that 1,000 times
in the next two days, okay?
So colors is the container or
the parent right for
all of those individual divs inside of it.
So the parent is where we're
going to put a display flex or
eventually display grid, okay?
And then we can say exactly what
we wanna do with that flex.
In this case,
we're going to do a row wrap.
Those are kind of the, well, not wrapped,
but row is a default value so
you actually won't see a change.
And then I put in a gap, gap of 1 rem.
You don't need to do padding or margin.
You can use gap instead.
>> If anyone is confused about magenta 50,
50 means 50%.
>> Yes, great, good catch, yeah,
what is this magenta 50 thing and
this weird looking hex number.
Anybody notice that hex had eight digits?
Okay, so this is magenta 50% and
that is the hex code for RGB, right?
Remember those are two digits,
R, two digits G, two digits B.
And then the last two
digits are the alpha.
So this is the same thing as RGBA.
We're just writing it in HEX format now.